This code challenge follows directly from the previous video, including that much of this code challenge
can be solved by copying and modifying the code that I explained in the previous video.
That also means that you can determine the level of difficulty of this code challenge by deciding how
much code you want to copy versus write from scratch.
The basic idea will be to evaluate the reproducibility of the results that we saw in the previous video.
Testing for reproducibility is crucial for progress in science.
It's so important that no matter what the results, that is something that you want to know.
That is to say, it's important to know what patterns and findings are reproducible, and it is equally
important to know what findings and conclusions are not reproducible.
Exercise one seems like a great exercise to start with.
The goal here is basically to create a function that you can call that implements the optimization that
you learned how to do in the previous video.
We're going to work with the GPT two small model so you can import that.
And it's also convenient to have a separate copy of a variable of the token embeddings matrix, just
like in the previous video.
And that is basically just for convenience to reduce the amount of code that you need to write later
on.
Anyway, your function to do the optimization can look something like this.
So you will recognize the overall flow of the code here based on the comments from the previous video,
so you can see what steps of this analysis I chose to put into this function.
Now at the end I am outputting the optimized embeddings vectors, but I chose not to do the cosine similarity
or token matching.
Inside of this function you could include that in your function if you like.
The purpose of having a function here is that later on in the next exercise, we will call this function
multiple times using different random initializations of an embeddings matrix.
So having this function basically just allows you to simplify the code later.
Anyway, once you have this function you can test it by running it once and then looking at the optimized
token sequence.
So when I created these slides this was the optimized sequence that I got.
So that's for exercise one.
Now you should pause the video and switch to code and implement that function.
And now I will switch to code and discuss my solution.
Import some libraries.
And let's see here I'm importing the model and extracting the embeddings matrix.
Pushing everything to the GPU.
And of course, calling Model.eval because we are not training the model so it can be switched into
eval mode.
Okay.
And then here you can see the training function.
There's no new code inside this function that you have not seen in the previous video.
So inside this function I begin by creating an initial random optimized embeddings using the same sequence
length of five as in the previous video.
Of course, you can change these parameters if you like.
And then here I'm normalizing it so that it has the same distributional characteristics, at least in
terms of the standard deviation as the real embeddings matrix that is already trained into GPT two.
Okay.
And then yeah, here's the optimizer.
You've seen this as well before.
And all of this stuff you've seen.
I'm really not going to discuss it.
Although you know just as a quick reminder, the idea is that we push the embeddings into the model,
not the tokens, but the embeddings directly into the model from which we extract the hidden states
at the outputs of each transformer block.
And then I extract the average so the average over all of the token positions for this particular dimension
from this particular transformer layer.
And that is the thing that we want to maximize, which means calling the loss function as the minus
of that.
Okay.
So that is that function.
Here I'm just going to test it once.
So sequence length of five.
This is just the same parameters as in the previous video.
Uh and now so I'm running one test.
And then here I'm going to get the cosine similarities from all of the individual embeddings vectors
from this matrix.
And then calculating cosine similarity with the real embeddings and then getting the maximum.
So which token has the maximum cosine similarity.
And then decoding that to give us our shooter in camp.
Now for the reproducibility exercise.
Run the function from exercise 110 times and store all of the optimized tokens in a matrix.
Here's an example of what your results should look like.
So this is a matrix of ten by five, corresponding to the ten repeats of the optimization and five tokens
in this sequence.
Remember that the optimization is identical in every one of these ten runs, except that the random
embeddings vectors are re-initialized in each of the ten runs, but the model is exactly the same,
the code is the same, the loss functions are the same, and so on.
So if there really is something Consistent about this sequence of five tokens that activates one dimension
in the model.
Then this set of five tokens should be identical in each of these ten runs.
Well, okay, there's noise and random stuff happening in here, but let's say that we do expect some
consistency so that the token sequences will be similar, if not identical, for all ten of these runs.
Yeah, even if they're not identical.
And if that really were the case, then there would be.
So there's 50 tokens in total in this matrix.
But if there were perfect reproducibility there would only be five unique tokens because yeah, perfect
reproducibility would mean that each row in this matrix would have exactly the same tokens in exactly
the same sequence.
And that leads us to the next part of exercise two, which is to count and print the total number of
unique optimized tokens in this matrix.
Again, perfect reproducibility would predict five out of 50 tokens are unique.
And down here in these rows, you can report the number of times that each specific token appeared for
all of the unique tokens.
Again, you know, even in the case of reproducibility, just with random initializations and noise.
Or maybe we just haven't done enough training to settle on the right solution.
Maybe it won't be exactly five out of 50 unique tokens, but it would still be quite compelling if there
are, let's say, 10 or 20 unique tokens out of 50.
Anyway, so run this analysis to get an output that looks like this.
By the way, this is not the entire set of results here.
I just cropped it at the first couple of lines for visualization.
Okay, so now you should pause the video and work through this exercise.
And now I'll switch to code and show my solution and have some discussion about these results.
Here I specify to do ten repeats, ten repetitions of this experiment.
And here is the matrix where I will store all of the optimized tokens.
So this is going to be a ten by five matrix.
Here is the for loop.
Here I'm calling the function that we wrote in the previous exercise.
And then here I'm decoding all of the tokens or all of the embeddings in from this result here.
And as I mentioned in the when I was explaining exercise one, if you like, you could also put this
code inside this training function, in which case your results would actually be really simple.
Or the code for exercise two would basically just look like this.
Okay.
But so this is how I chose to run it.
This will take a minute or something to run, so I'll pause the recording here.
So that took around one minute to run.
and this is on the GPU.
If you are curious, you could try running this again on the CPU and see how long that takes.
It actually won't be.
I think it won't be too big of a difference because we're not actually training the model, we're just
training the one embeddings matrix, and that training could easily be done on the CPU because the matrix
is not so big.
But even doing a forward pass with GPT two small is the difference between several seconds on the CPU
versus much less than a second on the GPU.
But anyway, okay, so it finished ten repeats.
Here we can see all of the tokens, and it's not immediately so obvious.
Oh, we actually do get some repetition here.
So there you go.
We get an identical token appearing at least once.
Let's see what the quantification shows.
So here I'm using numpy uniq to extract all of the unique tokens and also get all of the counts.
So it turns out that there are 48 unique tokens out of a total of 50.
So there are two tokens that were repeated twice.
They were optimized for twice.
That's this one, which is sup, and this one which is the Nitrome fan.
I have no idea what that means.
Maybe that's like a Reddit handle, like a username or something.
But anyway, so what do we make of these results?
So clearly there is not something that is super reproducible.
On the other hand, this does you know, this is a little bit of reproducibility.
Remember that there are 50,000 tokens approximately.
And so the chance, you know, the probability of getting the same token twice is just really, really,
really, really, really tiny.
If we just take every token, select every token at random.
So the fact that we get anything less than 50 is already, you know, a little bit interesting.
Thing.
That said, this is certainly not overwhelming.
Compelling evidence for.
Transforming random matrices into a particular token sequence that maximizes.
One particular feature of the model in a way that is really compellingly reproducible.
So that's it for this code challenge.
I hope you agree with me that null findings are still very insightful, because they highlight the complexity
of models, and they help us carve out a space for what works and what doesn't work.
On the other hand, null results can also be difficult to interpret because it is actually possible
that the analysis we tried here could work if we ran it at a finer granularity.
That is, imagine that we had done this analysis for one specific neuron inside an MLP layer in a transformer
block, and maybe there we could get great results.
Furthermore, it is possible that with some additional priors and additional constraints, so that we're
not using totally random embeddings vectors, that we might get some more sensible, interpretable results.
As I discussed a couple of videos ago when I introduced activation maximization.
Of course, here we are already running into a scaling issue where there are just so many neurons inside
all of the MLP layers, the attention blocks and the transformers and so on.
And this is only just GPT two small, let alone any of the larger models.
So I don't really recommend repeating this analysis for every single neuron, every single parameter
in the model.
That said, the goal of the next two videos is to show you code that actually would allow you to access
any individual piece of the model, including, for example, one specific MLP neuron in the expansion
layer.